 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
EVALUATION OF AUTOMATIC CLASS III DESIGNATION FOR  
Control-IQ Technology 
DECISION MEMORANDUM 
A. DEN Number: 
DEN190034 
B. Purpose for Submission: 
De Novo request for evaluation of automatic class III designation for Control-IQ technology. 
C. Manufacturer and Device Name: 
Tandem Diabetes Care, Inc. and Control-IQ technology 
D. Type of Test or Tests Performed: 
Not applicable. 
E. System Descriptions: 
1. Device Description: 
Control-IQ technology (Control-IQ, the device) is a software-only device intended for 
use by people with diabetes. The device controls insulin delivery from a compatible 
alternate controller enabled insulin pump (ACE pump) based on inputs provided by a 
compatible integrated continuous glucose monitor (iCGM) and inputs provided the user 
(e.g., carbohydrate intake, exercise, and sleep schedule). Control-IQ technology is meant 
to be installed on a compatible ACE pump. 
Control-IQ technology works to control glucose towards a glucose target range of 112.5-
160 mg/dL during normal use. Glucose targets are not customizable but can be changed 
by a user if sleep or exercise modes are set or announced. During sleep mode, this range 
is changed to 112.5-120 mg/dL, and it is changed to 140-160 mg/dL during exercise 
mode. 
Control-IQ technology includes an integrated feature whereby iCGM values are 
automatically populated into the glucose field of the integrated bolus calculator when the 
Control-IQ technology is active (i.e., the device is operating in closed-loop mode). This 
feature is disabled when Control-IQ is turned off.  
Using Control-IQ technology requires that users input their weight and their total daily 
insulin requirement, which should be established with the help of a health care provider 
before using the device.  
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Principles of Operation: 
Control-IQ technology predicts glucose levels 30 minutes in the future based on prior 
iCGM readings, insulin delivery history, and user input (e.g., carbohydrate intake, 
exercise, and sleep schedule) and uses that prediction to adjust insulin delivery. Control-
IQ technology can be used to adjust or suspend basal insulin delivery every 5 minutes 
and automatically deliver correction boluses of insulin based on actual and predicted 
CGM sensor readings. Users must manually deliver meal boluses they can calculate using 
the integrated bolus calculator and can manually adjust insulin delivery (change basal 
rates and deliver insulin boluses) when the Control-IQ technology is active.  
3. Modes of Operation: 
Does the applicant’s device contain the ability to transmit data to a computer, webserver, 
or mobile device? 
Yes ___X___ or No ________ 
Does the applicant’s device transmit data to a computer, webserver, or mobile device 
using wireless transmission? 
Yes __X____ or No ________ 
4. Software: 
FDA has reviewed applicant’s Hazard Analysis and Software Development processes for 
this line of product types: 
Yes___X____ or No________ 
F. Regulatory Information : 
1. Regulation section: 21 CFR 862.1356 
2. Classification: Class II 
3 Product code: QJI 
4. Panel:   75, Clinical Chemistry 
G. Indications For Use: 
1. Indication(s) for Use: 
Control-IQ technology is intended for use with compatible integrated continuous glucose 
monitors (iCGM) and alternate controller enabled (ACE) pumps to automatically 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
increase, decrease, and suspend delivery of basal insulin based on iCGM readings and 
predicted glucose values. It can also deliver correction boluses when the glucose value is 
predicted to exceed a predefined threshold.  
Control-IQ technology is intended for the management of Type 1 diabetes mellitus in 
persons 14 years of age and greater.  
Control-IQ technology is intended for single patient use and requires a prescription.  
Control-IQ technology is indicated for use with NovoLog or Humalog U-100 insulin. 
2. Special Conditions for Use Statement(s): 
This device is for prescription use only.  
This pump is for use only with U-100 Humalog or U-100 NovoLog. Only U-100 
Humalog and NovoLog have been tested and found to be compatible for use in the pump. 
Use of insulin with lesser or greater concentration can result in under delivery or over 
delivery of insulin. This can cause hypoglycemia (low BG) or hyperglycemia (high BG) 
events. Use of other drugs or medications can damage the pump and result in injury if 
infused. 
The sponsor performed an evaluation of the Control-IQ technology and determined that it 
may not be safe for use in children under the age of six because Control-IQ technology 
has lower limits of total daily insulin (≥10 units) and weight requirements (≥55 lbs.). 
Therefore, the sponsor has included a warning in the labeling for this device as follows: 
“Tandem performed an evaluation of the Control-IQ technology and determined that 
it may not be safe for use in children under the age of six because Control-IQ 
technology has lower limits of total daily insulin and weight requirements. Therefore, 
Control-IQ technology should not be used in anyone under the age of six years old. 
Control-IQ technology should also not be used in patients who require less than a 
total daily insulin dose of 10 units per day or who weigh less than 55 pounds, as those 
are the required minimum values needed in order for Control-IQ technology to 
operate safely.” 
When the device is in closed loop mode, the integrated iCGM auto-population bolus 
calculator feature of Control-IQ automatically enters individual iCGM values (i.e., point 
values) into the glucose field of the manual bolus calculator (the calculator is not auto -
populated with iCGM values when in open loop mode). The bolus calculator does not 
take trend information into account. Because iCGM point values are typically less 
accurate than self-monitoring blood glucose (SMBG) meter results, using iCGM point 
values alone without taking trend information into account may result in inaccurate bolus 
calculations. Therefore, the sponsor has included the following instruction in the labeling 
for this device as follows: 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“When the CGM reading is automatically populated into the bolus calculator, only 
the current CGM reading is used to calculate the correction bolus. The trend arrow is 
not used in the dose calculation. Speak with your healthcare provider for 
recommendations on how best to utilize the arrows for your correction bolus dosing.” 
At the time of device authorization, compatible iCGMs include the following: Dexcom 
G6 iCGM 
H. Standards Documents/Guidance Documents Referenced (if applicable): 
ISO 14971:2007: Medical Devices - Application of Risk Management to Medical Devices 
FDA Recognition No: 5-40 
ANSI/AAMI/IEC 62366-1:2015 Medical Devices – Application of usability engineering to 
medical devices 
ANSI/AAMI HE75:2009 Human factors engineering, Design of medical devices 
I. Performance Characteristics : 
For the purposes of analytical and clinical validation testing, the Control-IQ technology was 
installed on the Tandem t:slim X2 insulin pump with interoperable technology 
(DEN180058), which was paired with the Dexcom G6 continuous glucose monitoring system 
(DEN170088). Details on the performance characteristics of these devices can be found in 
the public decision summaries for each device. 
1. Analytical Performance: 
Not applicable. 
2. Comparison Studies: 
Not applicable. 
3. Clinical Studies: 
Pivotal Study: 
The sponsor conducted a controlled, prospective, multicenter pivotal clinical trial 
consisting of 168 subjects, with 112 subjects in the treatment arm using Control-IQ. The 
study enrolled subjects diagnosed with type 1 diabetes who were using insulin (either 
multiple daily injections (MDI) or pump therapy). The study included 6 months of 
follow-up on all enrolled subjects. The sponsor extended the study protocol for up to 15 
months to continue use of Control-IQ in all participants after the cross-over from SAP to 
Control-IQ in order to gather additional safety data.  
4 
Prior to wearing investigational study devices, all study subjects were trnined on the 
device. Subjects who did not cunently use an insulin pump or did not use a Dexcom G4, 
G5, or G6 CGM with readings captured on at least 11 out of the previous 14 days at the 
time of enrollment were required to paii icipate in a 14-day nm- in phase. Subjects who 
had prior experience with the Tandem t:slim pumps and who had the required amount of 
CGM data available were given the option to skip the nm-in phase. To enter the 
randomizat ion phase of the trial, paiiic ipants had to have obtained CGM readings on at 
least 11 out of the previo us 14 days, and pump-na'ive patients must have successfully 
used the study pump each day. Subjects were assessed for their knowledge of pump and 
CGM use prior to continuing to the randomization phase of the study. Subjects who were 
new to pump use had their insulin pump settings optimized during the nm- in phase . 
Pump settings were reviewed and further optimized at weeks 2, 13, and 26 of the study. 
A summaiy of the pivotal clinical study is provide d in the follow ing table (Control-IQ 
group abbreviated as CLC (closed-loop contrnl)): 
Study Feature Description 
Title The International Diabetes Closed Loop (iDCL) Trial : 
Pivotal Trial of t:slim X2 with Control-IQ Technology 
Summary A randomized controlled trial of 6 month at home 
closed loop contrnl (CLC) system vs. sensor-
augmented pump (SAP). 
Investigational Device Control-IQ Technology 
Objectives The objective of the study is to assess efficacy and 
safety of a closed loop system (Contrnl-IQ 
Technology) in a randomized controlled ti·ial. 
Study Design Randomized Clinical Trial with 2: 1 randomizat ion to 
intervention with the closed loop system vs. sensor-
augmented pump for 6 months. 
Number of Sites Seven US clinical sites 
Population There were 31 subjects who were 14 - 18 yeai·s old, and 
13 7 subjects > 18 yeai·s old. The age range was 14-71 
yeai·s with 33 as the average. 22 of the CLC group were 
MDI users. The average baseline HbAlc was 7.6. 
Key Inclusion Criteria 
• Type 1 Diabetes 
• Ages 14 and older 
Key Exclusion Criteria 
• Use of any non-insulin glucose-lowering agents 
except metfonnin 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sample Size 168 participants completed the 6-month randomized 
trial, with 112 in the intervention arm and 56 in the 
control arm. 
Treatment Groups Randomized Trial 
 Intervention Group: t:slim X2 with Control-IQ 
Technology and Dexcom G6 iCGM. 
 Control Group: Sensor-augmented pump (SAP) 
with no automated insulin delivery, and Dexcom 
G6 iCGM. 
Study Duration 6 months for primary study, and up to 15 months total 
with extension phase 
Protocol 
Overview/Synopsis 
Eligible participants not currently using an insulin 
pump and/or Dexcom G4, G5, or G6 CGM with 
minimum data requirements participated in a run-in 
phase of 2 to 8 weeks that was customized based on 
whether the participant was already a pump or CGM 
user. Participants who skip or successfully complete the 
run-in were randomly assigned 2:1 to the CLC group 
using t:slim X2 with Control-IQ Technology or the 
SAP group for 6 months. 
Pivotal Study Safety Results: 
No severe hypoglycemia events occurred in either arm of the study. One diabetic 
ketoacidosis (DKA) event occurred in the CLC group. This event occurred as the result 
of an infusion set failure. 
Hyperglycemia / ketosis events not meeting the definition of DKA were reportable if they 
met one of the following criteria: 
 evaluation or treatment was obtained at a health care provider facility for an acute 
event involving hyperglycemia or ketosis 
 blood ketone level ≥1.0 mmol/L and communication occurred with a health care 
provider at the time of the event 
 blood ketone level ≥3.0 mmol/L, even if there was no communication with a 
health care provider 
There were 13 hyperglycemia/ketosis events meeting the above reporting criteria in the 
CLC arm compared to 2 in the SAP arm. 
Subjects in both study arms were provided with blood ketone meters for use at home. 
There were 14 recorded events (11 subjects) of blood ketone levels >1.0 mmol/L in the 
CLC arm compared to 15 recorded events (8 subjects) in the SAP arm. 
6 
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
A summary of all reportable adverse events observed during the study is provided in the 
following table: 
Table 1: Adverse Events by Study Treatment Group (Pre‐ and Post‐Randomization) 
Post ‐ Randomization Pre‐
Randomization CLC SAP 
Hyperglycemia with Ketosis 12 2 1 
Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA) 1 ‐ ‐
Hyperglycemia without Ketosis 1 ‐ ‐
Concussion 1 ‐ ‐
Otitis Externa 1 ‐ ‐
Bypass Surgery 1 ‐ ‐
Total: 17 2 1 
There were two unanticipated adverse device effects (UADEs) during the study, each of 
which was related to problems with the device software and resulted in the study being 
temporarily suspended while the problem was investigated and resolved: 
1. Inappropriate suspension of basal insulin and inappropriate correction bolus delivery. 
There were several instances of excess insulin delivery as a result of this device 
malfunction, however there were no patient adverse events reported (i.e., no severe 
hypoglycemia or other adverse events). The device problem was corrected with a 
software patch during the study. 
2. Incomplete bolus request resulting in hyperglycemia/ketosis. As a result of this device 
malfunction, approximately 45 subjects experienced inappropriate insulin suspension. 
In one instance a subject developed ketosis (2.1 mmol/L) as a result, but the patient 
did not develop DKA. The device problem was corrected with a software patch 
during the study. 
Pivotal Study Observed Results: 
The data below describe how the device performed during the pivotal study.  
The table below provides a summary of selected metrics for the study run-in period 
(baseline), and the results after study completion (post randomization).  
7 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Available CGM readings, HbA1c, and mean glucose observed in the pivotal 
study 
Baseline Post Randomization 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
Hours of glucose readings,  
Median (Q1, Q3)* 
307 
(285, 327) 
306 
(283, 320) 
4267 
(4133, 4348) 
4141 
(3922, 4280) 
HbA1c,  
Mean ± SD 7.40 ± 0.96 7.40 ± 0.76 7.06 ± 0.79 7.39 ± 0.92 
Mean Glucose (mg/dL), 
Mean ± SD 166 ± 32 169 ± 25 156 ± 19 170 ± 25 
*Quartile 1, quartile 3 
During the pivotal study, the amount of time subjects spent in different CGM glucose 
ranges  was observed as described in the following tables: 
Table 3: Time spent in different glucose ranges as observed in the pivotal study 
Baseline Post Randomization 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
% time in range 70‐180 
mg/dL, Mean ± SD 61% ± 17% 59% ± 14% 71% ± 12% 59% ± 14% 
% time below 70 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
3.58% ± 
3.39% 
2.84% ± 
2.54% 
1.58% ± 
1.15% 
2.25% ± 
1.46% 
% time below 54 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
0.90% ± 
1.36% 
0.56% ± 
0.79% 
0.29% ± 
0.29% 
0.35% ± 
0.32% 
Table 4: Time spent in different glucose ranges analyzed by time of day, post-
randomization 
Daytime Nighttime 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
CLC 
(n=112) 
SAP 
(n=56) 
Mean Glucose (mg/dL), 
Mean ± SD 158 ± 20 170 ± 26 150 ± 18 170 ± 27  
% time above 300 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
2.6% ± 
3.8% 
4.8% ± 
6.1% 
1.8% ± 
2.5% 
4.5% ± 
6.3% 
% time above 250 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
7.6% ± 
7.4% 
12.4% ± 
10.5% 
5.4% ± 
5.6% 
12.3% ± 
10.5% 
% time above 180 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
28.6% ± 
12.7% 
38.3% ± 
15.2% 
22.5% ± 
12.5% 
39.1% ± 
16.8% 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
% time below 70 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
1.64% ± 
1.2% 
2.21% ± 
1.5% 
1.44% ± 
1.2% 
2.38% ± 
1.9% 
% time below 60 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
0.59% ± 
0.5% 
0.72% ± 
0.6% 
0.60% ± 
0.6% 
0.85% ± 
0.9% 
% time below 54 mg/dL,  
Mean ± SD 
0.28% ± 
0.3% 
0.32% ± 
0.3% 
0.32% ± 
0.3% 
0.44% ± 
0.5% 
Safety of CGM Auto-populating Bolus Calculator Feature: 
The device includes a feature whereby iCGM values are automatically populated into the 
glucose field of the integrated bolus calculator when the Control-IQ technology is active 
(i.e., the device is operating in closed-loop mode). The bolus calculator only uses the 
iCGM point value. It does not use iCGM trend information. When the Control-IQ 
technology is turned off (i.e., the device is operating in open-loop mode) the CGM auto-
populating feature is disabled and users must manually enter a blood glucose value. The 
iCGM auto-populating feature is an integrated component of the Control-IQ technology 
device and cannot be used as a stand-alone device. 
The sponsor analyzed iCGM readings collected during the pivotal study to assess the 
safety of Control-IQ technology feature whereby iCGM point values are auto-populated 
into the integrated bolus calculator. iCGM readings up to 5 hours after a bolus was 
delivered were analyzed.  
Two groups of bolus types were compared: (1) in which patients accepted the output of 
the bolus calculator based on the auto-populated iCGM value, with no modifications, and 
(2) in which patients manually adjusted the bolus calculation either by manually entering 
in a glucose value or manually altering the insulin dose recommendation. Results were 
stratified based on the iCGM value when the bolus was requested. 
The following table presents the rates of low CGM glucose values observed within a 5-
hour window after a bolus for boluses requested with various initial CGM values.  
9 
Table 5: Post-con ection bolus CGM readings (5 hours): based on starting glucose values 
iCGM Glucose 
Value Entry Type 
One or More iCGM 
Reading <54 mg/dL 
(95% CI) 
Three Consecutive 
iCGM Readings <70 
m2/dL 
Five or More iCGM 
Readings <70 mg/dL 
(95% CI) 
70-180 mg/dL 
Automatic 
(n=8,700) 
3% 
(2 .8, 3.5) 
7% 
(6.6, 7.6) 
11% 
(10.3, 11.6) 
Manual 
(n=953) 
5% 
(3 .2, 5.8) 
9% 
(7.4, 11.1) 
13% 
(10.4, 14.6) 
181- 250 mg/dL 
Automatic 
(n=6,071) 
4% 
(3 .9, 5.0) 
9% 
(8 .0, 9.4) 
12% 
(11.3, 13.0) 
Manual 
(n=568) 
5% 
(3.4, 7.1) 
9% 
(6.6, 11.3) 
12% 
(9 .5, 14.8) 
>250mg/dL 
Automatic 
(n=2,252) 
5% 
(4.0, 5.8) 
9% 
(7.5, 9.8) 
13% 
(11.9, 14.7) 
Manual 
(n=384) 
4% 
(2.4. 6.5) 
7% 
(4.5, 9.6) 
9% 
(6.5, 12.3) 
In the above table, the differences observed between post-conection bolus iCGM 
readings for boluses calculated using automatically populated iCGM values and those 
calculated using manually entered glucose values were not significantly different for 
staiiing iCGM glucose values below 250 mg/dL. For boluses given when staii ing iCGM 
glucose values were >250 mg/dL, the rate at which subjects had five or more consecutive 
iCGM readings <70 mg/dL within 5 hours post-bolus was higher when subjects used the 
auto-populated iCGM value. To address this risk, the sponsor updated the user guide and 
the trnining materials for physicians and patients to include information and instmctio ns 
explaining that the bolus calculator does not use trend info1mation, and that users should 
read the iCGM user guide and consult with their healthcai·e providers to detennine how to 
use iCGM trend infonnation when using the bolus calculator. 
Safety in the Pediatric Population 
The sponsor provided a limited amount of safety data from an interim data analysis from 
an ongoing study in subjects 6-12 yeai·s old. There were no episodes of DK.A or severe 
hypoglycemia repo1ied. This device is indicated for use in people with diabetes 14 years 
of age and older. 
In addition, the sponsor perfonned an evaluation of the Control-IQ technology and 
dete1mined that it may not be safe for use in children under the age of six because 
Control-IQ technology has lower limits of total daily insulin (~10 units) and weight 
requireme nts (~55 lbs.). Therefore , the sponsor has included a warning in the labeling for 
this device as follows, 
"Tandemperfo1med an evaluation of the Control-IQ technology and detennined that 
it may not be safe for use in children under the age of six because Control-IQ 
technology has lower limit s of total daily insulin and weight requirement s. Therefore , 
Control-IQ technology should not be used in anyone under the age of six years old. 
Control-IQ technology should also not be used in patients who require less than a 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
total daily insulin dose of 10 units per day or who weigh less than 55 pounds, as those 
are the required minimum values needed in order for Control-IQ technology to 
operate safely.” 
Postmarket Surveillance Study 
There is uncertainty remaining regarding the risk/benefit profile of the device when used 
in the broader intended use population. While the premarket clinical study provided to 
support the de novo authorization showed some benefits, the study included device users 
with relatively high levels of education relative to the general use population, and it was 
not adequately powered to assess differences in the rates of safety events (e.g., diabetic 
ketoacidosis and severe hypoglycemia). Furthermore, due to the nature of the study 
design, the apparent unfavorable difference in the rates of hyperglycemia/ketosis events 
(not rising to the level of severity of diabetic ketoacidosis) between the treatment and 
control arms may be due to reporting differences between users rather than a true 
difference from the device itself. 
Accordingly, a postmarket surveillance study will be ordered by FDA to confirm 
understanding of safety and to evaluate the following question: 
 What are the rates of diabetic ketoacidosis and severe hypoglycemia when the 
device is used in the real-world intended use population? 
 Are there differences in the rates of diabetic ketoacidosis and severe 
hypoglycemia between the device users and standard of care? 
To address these questions, the postmarket surveillance study will include: 
 A prospective single arm cohort study with a minimum of 1,354 subjects being 
followed for one year to assess differences in the rates of severe hypoglycemia 
and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) between the treatment arm and current standard 
of care (based on valid scientific evidence of event rates in current standard of 
care including patients using multiple daily injection therapy, standalone insulin 
pumps, or sensor-augmented pumps not including pumps with automated insulin 
dosing features).  
 A plan to collect robust data on the rates of severe hypoglycemia and DKA 
experienced by device users on a monthly basis throughout the study. 
 Enrollment targets for specific populations of interest (i.e., pump naïve users, 
CGM naïve users, pediatric users, users with baseline HbA1c>8.5%). 
4. Other Supportive Data Not Covered Above: 
a. Hazard Analysis: 
A comprehensive hazard analysis was provided for this device, in which design 
inputs and outputs, risks, and risk mitigations for software and interoperable hardware 
components associated with the safe and effective functioning of the device were 
reviewed. The hazard analysis provided in this submission accounted for the unique 
design elements, intended use, and risks of the Control-IQ technology. In particular, 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this hazard analysis accounted for the risks associated with interoperability between 
the software device and the hardware device it was installed on, as well as with other 
third-party digital devices which met predefined criteria but were not specifically 
identified. This analysis identified hazards which could reasonably be anticipated to 
impact the proper use of the device, traced all identified risks to adequate design 
controls, and demonstrated that design features were appropriately implemented and 
validated. 
b. Human Factors: 
Human factors validation tests were conducted with the Control-IQ technology 
installed on the t:slim X2 insulin pump with interoperable technology (DEN180058). 
The summative human factors validation study was performed with sixty 
representative participants interactive with the device in a simulated use environment. 
All study participants received training that was consistent with the training that 
patients would receive with the commercial product. Usability evaluations assessed 
comprehension and usability of the device for critical device tasks. Results of the 
study demonstrated that the device could be used safely by intended users in the 
intended use environment when used in combination with a digitally connected 
device. 
c. Insulin Compatibility: 
The Control-IQ technology is designed to work with either Novolog or Humalog U-
100 insulin. These insulins were used in the pivotal clinical study for this device and 
no other insulins have been tested for use with the device.  
Other insulins should not be used with this device. Using insulins with different 
concentrations or different action profiles (e.g., PK/PD)  with this device could result 
in under delivery or over delivery of insulin. This can cause hypoglycemia or 
hyperglycemia events. 
d. User and Provider Training: 
The sponsor provided detailed training materials for healthcare providers who will 
prescribe this device and manage patients who use this device. The training covers 
how the device works, details of the clinical study, setting up the device, and 
information on how to assess patient results with the device. 
A training plan for device users was also provided. The plan provides resources for 
various types of users including new pump users, users switching from a different 
pump, and users upgrading from a Tandem device. The training plan includes live 
(in-person or remote) pump training for new pump users (optional for prior pump 
users) and required online training modules. The training includes initial start-up, 
troubleshooting, maintenance, and management of the device. Training includes a 
follow-up 3-5 days after the initial training and subsequent communication with that 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
person’s healthcare provider to ensure ongoing follow-up care. Physician and user 
training as per the sponsor provided training materials is important to ensure safe use 
of the device. 
e. Data Logging: 
The sponsor provided validated software protocols which enable the device to record 
critical events, including information related to its state (e.g., commanded delivery 
rates/volumes, all algorithm calculations, open loop / closed loop mode, pump 
behavior, power on/off events), user inputs / key presses, and device settings (e.g., 
TDI, weight, sleep settings, and preferences). All log entries are time stamped, and 
the logs are either generated when the events occur or every five minutes in the case 
of recording algorithm calculations. These protocols were reviewed and found to be 
adequate. 
f. Interoperability: 
A plan and approach for interoperability were provided according to the FDA 
Guidance “Design Considerations and Pre-market Submission Recommendations for 
Interoperable Medical Devices - Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug 
Administration Staff” and determined to be adequate to support and clearly specify 
expectations, requirements, and interface specifications to potential interoperable 
devices. In addition, the plans provided by the sponsor covered their approach to 
working with connected device companies regarding contractual issues, interfaces for 
data communication and exchange, and post-market reporting procedures and 
responsibilities (e.g., who is responsible for investigating and reporting complaints, 
malfunctions, and adverse events).  
The sponsor additionally provided validated software protocols intended to ensure 
secure, accurate, and reliable communication with digital interfacing devices, as well 
as failsafe design features to mitigate the risks associated with interruption of 
communication with digitally connected devices. These protocols were reviewed and 
found to be adequate. 
g. Cybersecurity:  
Detailed information on cybersecurity of the device was reviewed and found to be 
acceptable. The sponsor also provided a software bill of materials, which provided 
details on all software used in the device and the hardware platform that the device 
was installed on. This included all manufacturer-developed, commercially licensed, 
open source, and off-the-shelf software components (including firmware as relevant), 
along with an identification of the hardware runtime environment in which each 
resides, with relevant version and/or model information, as well as details on whether 
each component was actively supported by its manufacturer or legacy licensed.  
13 
J. Proposed Labeling: 
The labeling suppo1is the decision to grant the De Novo request for this device . 
K. Identified Risks to Health and Mitigations Measures 
Identified Risk Mitigation Measure s 
Patient haim due to inappropriate drng 
delive1y 
Clinical data demonstrating device perfonnance 
Certain softw are validation testing 
User training plan 
Ce1iain drng compat ibility info1mation in 
labeling 
Risk due to poorer or different Clinical data demonstrating device perfonna nce 
perfonnance in pediatric populations in pediatric population 
Certain warning stateme nts and precautions in 
labeling 
Risk due to the inability of the controller Clinical data demonstrating device perfonnance 
to handle different Drng compatibi lity info1matio n in labeling 
phannacokinetic /phaimacodynamic User training plan 
chai·acteristics of the drngs Human factors testing 
Risk due to lack of compat ibility of 
connected devices 
Ce1iain validation of commun ication 
specifications, processes, and proced ures with 
digitally connected devices 
Limitations on interoperab le devices 
Risk of connected devices having 
inadequate perfo1mance to allow safe use 
of the controller 
Specifications for perfo1mance of connected 
devices 
Ce1iain validation of commun ication 
specifications, processes, and proced ures with 
digitally connected devices 
Limitations on interoperab le devices 
Failure to repo1i device malfunctions or 
adverse events to the device 
manufacture r 
Plans and procedures for assigning post-market 
responsibilitie s. 
Risk of latent flaws in softwai·e Robust softw are validation testing 
Ce1iain validation of commun ication 
specifications, processes, and proced ures with 
digitally connected devices 
Ce1iain verification and validation of risk 
control measures 
Failure to provide appropriate treatment Certain verification and validat ion of risk 
due to loss of collllllunication with control measures 
connected devices Ce1iain validation of collllllunication 
specificatio ns, proces ses, and procedures with 
digitally connected devices 
14 
Identified Risk Mitigation Measures 
Risk due to insecure transm ission of data Certain validation of commun ication 
spec ifications, processes, and procedures with 
digitally connected devices 
Failure to coITectly operate the device Human factors testing 
User training plan 
Compat ible devices listed in labeling 
Certain warning statements and precaut ions in 
labeling 
Failure to coITectly detennine the root 
cause of device malfunc tions 
Certain verification and validation of logging 
caoabi litv 
Risk due to data transmissio n 
interference/ electromagnet ic disturbance 
Ce1tain verification and validat ion of electrica l 
safety , electromagnet ic compat ibility, and 
radio freque ncy wireless testing 
L. Benefit/Risk Analysis 
Control- IQ technology is intended to be used with a compat ible iCGM and ACE pump to 
automatically increase, decrease , or suspend basal insulin based on cuITent and predicted 
glucose values . It can also deliver an automatic coITection bolus when the glucose value is 
predicted to exceed a predefi ned threshold under specific conditions. Glucose targets are not 
customizable but can be changed by a user if sleep or exerc ise modes are set or announced. 
The device is indicated for patien ts with type 1 diabetes 14 years and older. 
Users of the Control- IQ device had a percent time in iCGM range 70- 180 mg/dL of 71% in 
the randomiza tion phase of the trial; however , percent time in iCGM range 70-180 mg/dL is 
not a validated smTogate marker for clinical diabetes outcomes. Hemoglob in Ale (HbAlc) in 
the Control-IQ group was slightly improved compa red to baseline values, and it does not 
appear that changes in HbAlc would be worse in patien ts using Control -IQ compared to 
patien ts using SAP. Subjects completed a series of quest ionnaires and smveys before and 
after the randomiza tion phase of the study to assess changes in various quali ty of life aspects. 
In genera l, Control -IQ users repo1ted reductions in diabetes related distress and fear of 
hypog lycemia. The device can suspend insulin delive1y overn ight to reduce the risk of 
nighttime hypog lycemia , which may prov ide quality of life improvement to device users and 
caregivers of device users. These aspects of the data collected indicated there may be 
significan t benefits to patients from using the Control-IQ device . 
The study was limited to subjects 14 years and older, thus safety and effectiveness was not 
demonstrated in children younge r than 14. The device is indicated for use in subjects 14 
years of age and older. Additio nally, most of the study population had high socioeco nomic 
and educational status which is likely not genera lizable to the intended use popula tion. As a 
result of the residua l unce1tainty regard ing the genera lizability of the study results a 
postma rket study will be perfonned for this device to confnm device safety in a broader 
popu lation. 
The risks associated with use of the Control-IQ techno logy in conjunct ion with the iCGM 
and ACE pump include hypog lycemia , severe hypoglycem ia, hyperg lycemia , and diabetic 
15 
 
 
 
 
  
-
ketoacidosis (DKA). These events can be attributed to software malfunctions with 
subsequent over-delivery or inappropriate suspension/under-delivery of insulin commands. 
Other factors can include erroneous iCGM data transfer with subsequent inappropriate 
insulin delivery or lack of insulin delivery, interoperable device communication/connectivity 
issues resulting in temporary loss of Control-IQ use, lack of user knowledge and training 
leading to device misuse, and a potential increase in mechanical problems that could 
compromise glycemic control if frequent infusion set failures occur leading to interruption of 
insulin delivery.  
In the clinical study, there was one episode of DKA and no severe hypoglycemia events. The 
rate of severe hypoglycemia or DKA is difficult to ascertain given these are relatively 
infrequent events and the study was limited to 168 participants with 6-month device use 
duration. There appears to be a higher risk of hyperglycemia with ketosis based on the study 
event criteria; however, it is unclear if the higher rate of hyperglycemia and ketosis events in 
the CLC arm compared to the SAP arm is directly related to  use of the Control-IQ device. 
The rate of reportable ketosis events as defined in the study protocol was higher in the 
Control-IQ arm; however, the number of measured ketosis events > 1 mmol/L ketones (many 
of which were not recorded as study reportable events because the subjects did not report the 
event to a healthcare provider) was similar between both arms. Therefore, there is uncertainty 
about whether this is a true difference or a study artifact. Overall, there was one DKA event, 
caused by infusion site failure, observed in the Control-IQ group, however twice as many 
participants were randomized to Control-IQ compared to SAP and the DKA event may not 
be directly associated with the device. The rate of other adverse events appears to have been 
similar between the two study arms when accounting for possible differences in reporting. 
While the study was not statistically powered to demonstrate statistical superiority, the 
results suggest that the Control-IQ device may offer several benefits compared to use of a 
SAP including possible improvements in several measures of diabetic control such as HbA1c 
and blood glucose concentrations. Given that the study was not adequately powered to assess 
these specific improvements, or to assess the rates of rare events such as DKA and severe 
hypoglycemia, collection of additional data in the post-market space can confirm the safety 
of the device during real-world use.  
The sponsor has demonstrated that the probable benefits of Control-IQ technology outweigh 
the probable risks in light of the special controls for this device type and in combination with 
general controls. The special controls for this device type are intended to provide reasonable 
assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device in the hands of the intended users. 
M. Patient Perspectives 
Patient perspectives considered include information provided directly to the Agency by 
patients in written statements and also obtained through discussion with patients and patient 
advocacy groups at public forums regarding patient experiences with automated insulin 
dosing systems and digitally connected diabetes devices. This device will allow patients, in 
conjunction with their healthcare providers, to have more choice in the automated insulin 
dosing algorithm that integrates with other elements of their diabetes management strategy 
and works best for their body and their care. In addition, availability of this device will 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
facilitate agile technology development that will ultimately provide innovative diabetes 
diagnostics and therapies to patients more quickly. 
N. Conclusion 
The De Novo request is granted and the device is classified under the following and subject to 
the special controls identified in the letter granting the De Novo request:  
Product Code: QJI 
Device Type: Interoperable automated glycemic controller 
Class: II (special controls) 
Regulation: 21 CFR 862.1356 
17 